Okay.
NOTE CONF
Good afternoon.
The show.
NOTE CONF
You'll all be glad to know that I tested negative
this morning, which is why I'm not wearing a mask.
NOTE CONF
And so this lecture should be a lot more comfortable
than yesterday's lecture was for all concerned.
NOTE CONF
Um, so yesterday I talked largely about contra position and
the different ways in which we can apply contra position.
NOTE CONF
Earlier in the week, we applied it to sequence, and
now we've been applying it to syllogisms and generating more
NOTE CONF
syllogisms.
And we've been generating existential syllogisms where we say, um,
NOTE CONF
aid is not entail C, which means that there is
an A that is not C, so that makes it
NOTE CONF
existential statements.
I left you a few things to think about.
NOTE CONF
Not particularly going to go through them because they were
supposed to be fodder for the tutorials.
NOTE CONF
What I want to do today is wrap up with
syllogisms.
NOTE CONF
So we will go back to categorical propositions.
Think about them a little bit more.
NOTE CONF
Think about how we've derived one syllogism from another, and
have a look at the complete set of available valid
NOTE CONF
syllogisms that we can use, and finish off with a
comment about the thing that I've mentioned a few times
NOTE CONF
so far, the existential assumption, and I'll explain a bit
more about how that works and why it was a
NOTE CONF
bit of a mess for Aristotle.
So any questions from yesterday?
NOTE CONF
Any questions about this composition stuff?
The syllogisms we introduced yesterday with existential statements in them.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So let's go back and think a little bit about
NOTE CONF
the categorical propositions.
So when I introduced categorical propositions.
NOTE CONF
I said they had the form every or no is
B or not B, and the reason we've been looking
NOTE CONF
at them is that they're more general than propositional logic
because they have quantifiers every or no or some, but
NOTE CONF
they are not as powerful as full first full first
order logic, which is too much to cope with.
NOTE CONF
And we've seen several forms of categorical statement.
We've seen every human is mortal.
NOTE CONF
We've seen the opposite of it.
No human is immortal, and we've seen existential statements.
NOTE CONF
Um, some human is Greek, some human is not Greek.
And for Aristotle and the tradition that grew up from
NOTE CONF
Aristotle until the 19th century.
These were considered to be the four canonical forms of
NOTE CONF
categorical proposition, and they were given English or Greek and
Latin originally Greek, of course, later Latin, and then later
NOTE CONF
English terms called universal affirmative because it's a universal statement
about everything, and it's affirmative because it's saying something positive.
NOTE CONF
Every A is B universal negative, which is talking about
everything and making a negative statement.
NOTE CONF
No, A is B, and the traditional terms in English
here were particular because you're asserting that there is one
NOTE CONF
particular a that has the property B or here some
particular A that has the property, not B, and we
NOTE CONF
represented them in Venn diagrams.
So we have the shading here to say where something
NOTE CONF
is not happening.
There are no A's that are not B, there are
NOTE CONF
no A's that are a B and noticed that I'm
negating and flipping around.
NOTE CONF
And here we assert the existence of some particular object
which sits in A and B.
NOTE CONF
And here we assert the existence of something that sits
in A, not B.
NOTE CONF
And notice that the diagonal statements contradict each other.
So if every A is B that contradicts the statement
NOTE CONF
that some A is not B, and similarly these contradict.
Um, the observant amongst you will have seen this bit
NOTE CONF
in small print up here, which says that these are
not exactly Aristotle's categorical propositions.
NOTE CONF
So if you haven't looked ahead at the next slide,
can you guess why it's not exactly.
NOTE CONF
Uh, you see.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Maybe because there's negations.
Um, because there's negation.
NOTE CONF
So the negation is Aristotelian.
So on the left side, Aristotle didn't like negation, but
NOTE CONF
on the right side it was okay.
The existentialism.
NOTE CONF
Well, I said I was going to talk about the
existential assumption, didn't I?
NOTE CONF
So that's why.
So.
NOTE CONF
This is something that some of you have also been
tempted to assume.
NOTE CONF
There have been various questions on Piazza.
I think too many of them were private questions.
NOTE CONF
And let me again discourage private questions unless you're really
revealing your solution.
NOTE CONF
Um, in everyday English, it's a bit unclear what I
mean, if I say.
NOTE CONF
Um, let me think of a plausible example.
Does the statement all mice are vermin?
NOTE CONF
imply the existence of mice?
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
What do you think?
This is just a question about language.
NOTE CONF
Okay, what about the statement?
All unicorns have one horn.
NOTE CONF
Am I committing to the existence of unicorns?
I mean, somewhere, but not in this universe, I hope.
NOTE CONF
Um, so Aristotle was a bit of a realist.
He thought that it was simply nonsense to talk about
NOTE CONF
things that don't exist.
Why would you want to talk about things that don't
NOTE CONF
exist?
And of course, in a Greek setting that made for
NOTE CONF
some interesting political and religious issues.
If you say.
NOTE CONF
All the gods have short tempers that could get you
into trouble in several different ways.
NOTE CONF
I mean, the Greeks were not too big on the
importance of believing in gods, but nonetheless, gods were real
NOTE CONF
for many of them, but maybe not for the intellectual
elite.
NOTE CONF
It's unclear, but you could still get into trouble for
denying the existence of gods.
NOTE CONF
Um, so when Aristotle was working out the details of
his theory, he reckoned that if I say all A
NOTE CONF
or B, then that requires me also to commit to
the fact that there is such a thing as an
NOTE CONF
A.
So for Aristotle, if you say every a is B,
NOTE CONF
that also implies that some A is B, whereas in
modern logic we take the view that for all statements
NOTE CONF
are true when there aren't any of the thing you're
talking about.
NOTE CONF
And that's one of the things that often confuses people
in logic.
NOTE CONF
The reason we do it is because everything simply works
much more nicely.
NOTE CONF
I'll come back to this at the end to illustrate
further that it works much more nicely.
NOTE CONF
So this is just historical information.
You will see the modern version of for all and
NOTE CONF
universal quantification in any book.
After about 1850, I think.
NOTE CONF
But if you ever go and look at medieval logic,
um, it is possible still to learn medieval logic.
NOTE CONF
There is a Catholic university in Hungary which still teaches
people medieval logic.
NOTE CONF
Um, but that's probably about it.
So I want to go back and think about syllogisms
NOTE CONF
again and Venn diagrams, and think of some slightly more
complex syllogisms.
NOTE CONF
We haven't talked much about existential syllogisms and how they
interact with universal statements.
NOTE CONF
So here is an example of a syllogism involving universal
statements and particular statements.
NOTE CONF
So the one I have in mind is no mathematician
is infallible.
NOTE CONF
And some programmers are mathematicians.
And I claim that from these two statements it follows
NOTE CONF
that some programmers are fallible.
Do you agree that that's a sound piece of reasoning?
NOTE CONF
And as always, if I'm using any word that hasn't
entered your vocabulary because people who wrote the book have
NOTE CONF
a very wide vocabulary shout.
And if you're one of the people who wants to
NOTE CONF
know whether infallible is the same as not fallible, yes
it is.
NOTE CONF
Despite the fact that inflammable is not the same as
not flammable.
NOTE CONF
So if this is a sound piece of reasoning, how
can we show that it's a sound piece of reasoning?
NOTE CONF
Well, you can try to argue by direct logic.
Another way you can show that it's direct is to
NOTE CONF
start from Barbara and manipulate Barbara by doing contra positions
to it until you end up with this.
NOTE CONF
And we reckon that doing contra position is a sound
way of turning one syllogism into another.
NOTE CONF
So if we can start from Barbara and mess around
with contra positions and get this, we think it's reasonable
NOTE CONF
and you should do that exercise.
I think you probably have to do it in the
NOTE CONF
tutorial anyway, but even if you don't, you should do
it.
NOTE CONF
But we can also use the Venn diagram approach to
convince ourselves that this is true.
NOTE CONF
So let me show you that again because it's an
exercise that we will do.
NOTE CONF
So control is not B this is the diagram for
that premise says there's nothing in the middle.
NOTE CONF
So C entails not B is the same as b
entails, not C it's the symmetrical one.
NOTE CONF
There's nothing that is both B and c.
This is the diagram for A does not entail c.
NOTE CONF
This says there is something in the middle that is
something that is both A and C.
NOTE CONF
If we plug these things together we get a diagram
that looks like that.
NOTE CONF
So this grey shading is carried over here.
This existential thing has carried over here.
NOTE CONF
Now, this is where the diagrams get a little bit
ambiguous.
NOTE CONF
Is this central diagram an unambiguous representation of the merge
of these two diagrams?
NOTE CONF
Do you see.
Anything where I've been, where there's some imprecision there that
NOTE CONF
really I ought to tidy up.
Sorry.
NOTE CONF
The order.
No.
NOTE CONF
The, um.
If the order in the order is fine, it doesn't
NOTE CONF
really matter.
So.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
So are you asking why is he in the middle?
NOTE CONF
C is in the middle because it is the middle
term.
NOTE CONF
It's the term that joins the two premises.
That's a good point.
NOTE CONF
So I think I haven't said that explicitly, but when
you draw these diagrams.
NOTE CONF
The way we draw them, we put on the top
the variable that is in both the two premises and
NOTE CONF
here that is C and C.
It's not those two, it's the one that is shared.
NOTE CONF
So that's a good point.
But I've done something in the diagram which isn't completely
NOTE CONF
justified when I merged.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
So in here I put an x and that x
is representing an object anywhere in this region okay.
NOTE CONF
Whereas down here I've left the x where it is.
But actually the x could also be in there.
NOTE CONF
Now that's okay because this region is shaded.
And therefore I know that there isn't an X in
NOTE CONF
there.
And therefore the x that was in this region must
NOTE CONF
actually be in the right hand half of it.
But that's a little argument that I have to make.
NOTE CONF
And it's quite a subtle one, so you might miss
it.
NOTE CONF
Okay, what happens when I pull out the C?
I'm expecting to get a premise that a diagram that
NOTE CONF
corresponds to that.
Well, I do, because if I pull out the C,
NOTE CONF
then I get left with two partially shaded regions and
the white paint spills over and all the shaded regions
NOTE CONF
disappear.
And the X is still sitting in here somewhere, which
NOTE CONF
now corresponds to this region.
And so I get a diagram that corresponds to the
NOTE CONF
conclusion.
Some programmer is fallible.
NOTE CONF
Assert the existence of a programmer who is not fallible.
Questions about that.
NOTE CONF
It's a slightly more sophisticated diagram, proof than than one
we've done before because of these little things that you
NOTE CONF
have to think about on the way.
So anybody.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
So what.
NOTE CONF
Does it mean to be in a if somebody is
not in the.
NOTE CONF
Area.
So if where are we.
NOTE CONF
You mean back up here.
So up here.
NOTE CONF
Well X is in a right.
So this is some a is C.
NOTE CONF
Remember when you have the the negated thing A does
not entail not c means some a is C which
NOTE CONF
is always very hard to remember.
But if you think of it you can either think
NOTE CONF
about it each time, which is what I end up
doing, or you can try to learn it.
NOTE CONF
So.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
It's not impossible.
How do we compare?
NOTE CONF
Does not entail to.
Or so which.
NOTE CONF
Which thing in Haskell or so or in Haskell is
the or of a list, right.
NOTE CONF
So if you are implementing does not entail then yes,
you would be using an Or when you've got lots
NOTE CONF
of premises on either side.
But we haven't got on to having lots of premises
NOTE CONF
on either side yet, so we will get on to
that.
NOTE CONF
Um, so more generally that's a comment about duality, which
I've mentioned.
NOTE CONF
So, or is the dual of the.
And if you take a big and of things and
NOTE CONF
you apply negation to that, you get the or of
the negation inside.
NOTE CONF
We will see a lot of that later, but not
yet.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so let me give you one to think about.
So here is a putative syllogism.
NOTE CONF
Um, and at this point, I like to do another
of my little linguistic surveys, because this is quite a
NOTE CONF
slow lecture and I have plenty of time to do
random things.
NOTE CONF
So there is this word I'm going to give you
three pronunciations of it, and I want to know who
NOTE CONF
uses which pronunciation.
So who says fungi?
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Who says fungi and who says fungi?
NOTE CONF
Good grief.
Okay, congratulations.
NOTE CONF
Um.
A fungi is a very old pronunciation.
NOTE CONF
It's so old that even I don't use it.
So I'm curious where you got it from.
NOTE CONF
What's your linguistic background?
Dunno.
NOTE CONF
Maybe you heard some 19th reading of a 1930s book.
Um, why did people say fungi?
NOTE CONF
Um, because back in the day, Latin words in English
were pronounced as if they were English.
NOTE CONF
So in normal English spelling, g before I or e
is soft, therefore fungi and the letter ie is pronounced
NOTE CONF
ie, so hence fungi.
Um.
NOTE CONF
After the First World War, when we were Latins, teaching
in schools was changed and they started trying to use
NOTE CONF
actual Latin pronunciation, and that kind of permeated its way
through into normal, everyday English, with the result that we
NOTE CONF
are now completely confused about where the Latin words in
English should be pronounced in a Latin way, in English
NOTE CONF
way, or something horribly in between.
So generally we do something horribly in between, like fungi
NOTE CONF
instead of fungi.
So here is the alleged syllogism.
NOTE CONF
All plants are.
What am I, fungi?
NOTE CONF
Some flowers are not plants.
Some.
NOTE CONF
Therefore some flowers are not fungi.
Is that a valid piece of reasoning?
NOTE CONF
I forget about whether any of the statements are true
or not.
NOTE CONF
I heard an answer.
I have some more answers.
NOTE CONF
Somebody thinks it is a valid piece of reasoning, right?
Two.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Three.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Any more votes for no.
NOTE CONF
Somebody shouted no.
Yep.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
That leaves an awful lot of people who haven't worked
NOTE CONF
it out yet.
Um, it gets tricky, doesn't it?
NOTE CONF
So three short sentences, and we have to think quite
hard about whether this is a sensible piece of reasoning
NOTE CONF
or something that you might hear in an election address.
Let's see if we can actually work it out from
NOTE CONF
the Venn diagram.
So I'm going to do the same thing.
NOTE CONF
I'm going to do the merge.
And this time I'm going to be more careful about
NOTE CONF
this x.
So over here I have a entails b.
NOTE CONF
So that means everything that is A is also.
B there's nothing in here.
NOTE CONF
Over here I have some C is not a.
So that's asserting the existence of an X in here.
NOTE CONF
And now when I merged the diagrams I'm going to
be more careful.
NOTE CONF
I know this x is in here, but I don't
know whether it's in here or in here.
NOTE CONF
There might be X's in both places, but all I
know for certain is that there is at least one
NOTE CONF
X in this region.
So there could be one in here, or there could
NOTE CONF
be one in here.
So what do I get if I pull out the
NOTE CONF
A?
If I pull out the A then what changes the
NOTE CONF
white paint spills into here.
So this region is now white.
NOTE CONF
Nothing is empty.
And what I don't know is that there's an X
NOTE CONF
here, because I still only know that there might be
X in the middle here or here.
NOTE CONF
So I don't have this red x solidly.
It might be over there.
NOTE CONF
However this conclusion C does not entail B that says
some C is not B.
NOTE CONF
Requires me to demonstrate that there is definitely an X
in this region.
NOTE CONF
I don't have a demonstration.
This x might be sitting over here, so I have
NOTE CONF
failed to establish a diagrammatic proof.
And from there I can go on to construct an
NOTE CONF
actual example.
So if the x is here in the middle, then
NOTE CONF
the conclusion doesn't match what I have here.
So what I'm going to try to do is construct
NOTE CONF
a universe in which there is an X sitting in
this middle region here, and that will satisfy the premise,
NOTE CONF
because it'll be down here and it will satisfy the
second premise because it will be down here, but it
NOTE CONF
won't satisfy the conclusion.
And where I'm going to do that is just invent
NOTE CONF
a universe.
So when you're looking for counterexamples, you can invent any
NOTE CONF
universe you like.
So I'm going to say there's a thing called a
NOTE CONF
quants.
And let's assume that it's a fungus and a flower,
NOTE CONF
which is botanical nonsense.
But that doesn't matter because we can create whatever universe
NOTE CONF
we like.
And it's not a plant.
NOTE CONF
So the quants is sitting.
Where is the quants sitting in there?
NOTE CONF
And let's say the universe contains exactly one quants.
So what does the syllogism say?
NOTE CONF
All plants are fungi.
Well, this universe doesn't have any plants in it, so
NOTE CONF
that's true.
Some flowers are not plants.
NOTE CONF
We have a cancer, which is a flower and not
a plant.
NOTE CONF
So that's true.
The conclusion claims that some flowers are not fungi, but
NOTE CONF
we only have one flower and it is a fungus
because we've only got the quants.
NOTE CONF
So we've constructed a universe in which this syllogism fails
to be valid.
NOTE CONF
Go back.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
And therefore, the syllogism fails to be found in all
universes.
NOTE CONF
We found one particular universe in which it fails.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
If you want to go away.
And.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Let's go from there.
NOTE CONF
Um.
So if.
NOTE CONF
Replace which?
Which?
NOTE CONF
Instead of.
All plants are fungi.
NOTE CONF
If we said all fungi are plants.
You're now asking me to prove a syllogism in my
NOTE CONF
head in front of you, aren't you?
Which is a mean and sadistic.
NOTE CONF
Shall we do it on the board?
That means, shall you do it on the board?
NOTE CONF
Um, so I won't ask anybody to come up and
draw, but you can tell me what to draw.
NOTE CONF
So we are now looking.
For.
NOTE CONF
Um.
I'm sorry.
NOTE CONF
I'm not supposed to write that far over.
because the people looking online can't see it.
NOTE CONF
Sorry about that.
So we're not messing with the right hand statement.
NOTE CONF
What's the middle one?
Eh?
NOTE CONF
Okay, so what does the left hand diagram look like
now?
NOTE CONF
Somebody shout a bit louder.
Tell me what to do.
NOTE CONF
I'm just an automaton.
Shade this bit.
NOTE CONF
Right.
B entails a if there's nothing in B that is
NOTE CONF
not a.
So if I do the merge.
NOTE CONF
I have an x that might be here.
Or might be there.
NOTE CONF
And I have some shaded stuff.
Which shades out the x that might be there.
NOTE CONF
So that's no longer a problem.
So it looks to me as if it's now valid.
NOTE CONF
Because this X now has to be over there.
Um, to I agree, if all plants are fungi.
NOTE CONF
And some flowers are not plants, then it does indeed
follow that some flowers are not fungi.
NOTE CONF
Good.
So the diagram and human logic agree.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So you will get some exercises on this in the
NOTE CONF
tutorial.
And I have a fourth year student trying multiple fourth
NOTE CONF
year students trying to write something that can read your
answers to these and work out whether they're correct or
NOTE CONF
not, because your poor tutors have a very hard time
looking at your graphical diagrams and deciding whether they were
NOTE CONF
correct answer to the question or not.
And if you like thinking about these things, you might
NOTE CONF
like to think about why is it hard to mark
diagram questions?
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Any questions about this?
NOTE CONF
Further questions.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So that was diagrams I want to go back to
something a bit easier to handle.
NOTE CONF
We have talked about several ways of taking a syllogism,
such as Barbara and doing stuff to it in order
NOTE CONF
to get another syllogism.
So something we did right at the beginning was substitution.
NOTE CONF
We said, if you've got A, B and C, you
can substitute anything you like for A, B and C,
NOTE CONF
and you still get a syllogism.
In particular, we could substitute not B for B and
NOTE CONF
still get a syllogism.
Unlike Aristotle, we had double negation.
NOTE CONF
Cancellation goes double, negations cancel.
we had contra position within a sequent.
NOTE CONF
So if I have A entails B, I know that
not B entails not A and vice versa.
NOTE CONF
And we did contra position between the conclusion and one
of the premises.
NOTE CONF
So here I've done contra position between this conclusion and
this premise to get a new syllogism.
NOTE CONF
Now these processes that we do are all things that
you can do backwards.
NOTE CONF
So if you substitute one thing for another, you can
substitute the original back in again.
NOTE CONF
Double negation works both ways.
Contra position works both ways.
NOTE CONF
If I can't propose this or contraption it according to
taste, you get back to there.
NOTE CONF
Similarly, if I take this and contra pose it again,
I get back to there.
NOTE CONF
So these are symmetrical processes means they also have the
nice property that as well as turning a sound syllogism
NOTE CONF
into an unsound syllogism.
They saw a sound syllogism into a sound syllogism.
NOTE CONF
They also turn an unsound syllogism into an unsound syllogism.
So if you find yourself needing to come up with
NOTE CONF
lots of examples of unsound syllogisms.
For example, if you're trying to set tutorial exercises, then
NOTE CONF
you can generate them by applying these rules to any
existing one.
NOTE CONF
Instantly.
If this piece of logic is not immediately obvious to
NOTE CONF
you, you should go away and think about it until
it becomes obvious.
NOTE CONF
It's not a trivial piece of reasoning, but it's a
simple piece of reasoning.
NOTE CONF
And if you don't see why this sentence makes sense,
then please ask.
NOTE CONF
Okay, here are all the syllogisms that are sound.
So if you look in the book, you'll see this
NOTE CONF
table laid out.
Um, my spacing is a bit off, isn't it?
NOTE CONF
I should do something about that.
Make it a bit more elegant.
NOTE CONF
So we have one, two, three, four, five by 315
sound syllogisms.
NOTE CONF
In our modern view of the world.
I mean, this is a semi Aristotelian view of the
NOTE CONF
world because we're we're allowing we're separating negated predicates on
the right from positive predicates on the right.
NOTE CONF
So here we have the universal affirmative.
Here we have the universal negative.
NOTE CONF
So these are the 15 syllogisms that Aristotle thought was
sound and that we also think are sound.
NOTE CONF
If you were learning this 500 years ago, you would
now be well, you would already some time ago have
NOTE CONF
memorised this little rhyme.
Not exactly a rhyme, is it?
NOTE CONF
It's a verse because it doesn't rhyme.
But.
NOTE CONF
At some point I will tell you in an entirely
voluntary way what all this stuff means.
NOTE CONF
It really is quite fun.
So here are 15 principles of sound reasoning about categorical
NOTE CONF
statements.
And these are the only principles of sound reasoning about
NOTE CONF
categorical statements.
If you see anybody trying to do reasoning that is
NOTE CONF
not one of these, then it is wrong.
So let me go back to a reprise.
NOTE CONF
This is the end of syllogisms.
So what have we done in the process of working
NOTE CONF
up to see logistic reasoning.
We started by defining the notion of proposition, which is
NOTE CONF
a Boolean true or false thing.
We generalised it to talk about predicates, which is a
NOTE CONF
proposition that talks about things.
So you can say the moon is full.
NOTE CONF
We introduce the idea of categorical proposition, which is a
relation between two predicates.
NOTE CONF
Saying that one of them applies implies the other.
Either for everything in the universe or for something in
NOTE CONF
the universe, and either affirmatively or negatively.
Although in the modern logical view we don't really care
NOTE CONF
about affirmative or negative.
We introduced a modern notation.
NOTE CONF
So this is a much nicer notation than the Aristotelian
notation.
NOTE CONF
And we write it as a entails B or a
does not entail b.
NOTE CONF
We showed that we can interpret these things in Venn
diagrams, and we saw ways of reasoning with Venn diagrams
NOTE CONF
to check that.
An alleged syllogism is either sound or wrong.
NOTE CONF
So a syllogism takes two premises and hit derives a
conclusion.
NOTE CONF
Um, a thing that has come up a couple of
times.
NOTE CONF
Let's repeat it.
The way we are looking at syllogisms, it doesn't really
NOTE CONF
matter what the order of the premises is.
Um, I don't have one written up, but we write
NOTE CONF
one premise on the left.
One on the right makes no difference to us.
NOTE CONF
In the traditional medieval, classical, medieval view, there is a
distinction between the two.
NOTE CONF
It's not important.
It was the way they were thinking at the time
NOTE CONF
when they tried to systematise it, but it has no
logical importance.
NOTE CONF
And we can check things.
So that sums up what we've done with categorical propositions
NOTE CONF
and Venn diagrams.
And also some rules.
NOTE CONF
So the final thing we did was to say we
have ways of manipulating a syllogism by applying operations to
NOTE CONF
it.
Substitution double negation called proposition.
NOTE CONF
Um, if I said go away, implement syllogisms, implement contra
position.
NOTE CONF
Implement double negation cancellation in Haskell.
Can you do it?
NOTE CONF
So a few people are confident that they can.
Who is currently confident that they cannot?
NOTE CONF
Okay, that's a very uncommitted, unusually uncommitted bunch.
Well, you're going to anyway, right?
NOTE CONF
So you will find that actually it's quite easy.
And also it's quite useful because there are a bunch
NOTE CONF
of examples in this stuff.
And writing this stuff by hand is horrible.
NOTE CONF
We have computers to do this stuff, so making sure
that the examples are correct is much easier to do
NOTE CONF
after you've implemented the stuff in Haskell.
So this will be coming up in tutorials for your
NOTE CONF
future enjoyment.
Um, before I get on to the final closing comment
NOTE CONF
about the existential assumption, any questions about anything we've done
in the last couple of weeks about syllogisms and categorical
NOTE CONF
propositions?
Okay, yeah.
NOTE CONF
It's going to be pretty bad.
So is there always for you?
NOTE CONF
Um, that's a good question.
Um, the question was, will there always be three circle
NOTE CONF
Venn diagrams rather than four circle Venn diagrams or five
circle Venn diagrams?
NOTE CONF
I realise I've lost the people on line again.
I'm sorry.
NOTE CONF
Um, is that a valid piece of reasoning?
Yeah, it's just a chain.
NOTE CONF
But we don't really need to write things like this
because we can combine That and that using techniques that
NOTE CONF
we will currently just treat as normal mathematics.
But we will later in the course, see how you
NOTE CONF
can do this kind of thing formally so that you
can plug together chains of reasoning.
NOTE CONF
So yes, Aristotle could have gone looking at syllogisms with
more than two premises, but he never did, and nor
NOTE CONF
did anybody else until later.
Well, until after we'd stopped doing syllogisms and done more
NOTE CONF
powerfully and started working in modern logic.
And indeed, we will be talking about that fairly soon.
NOTE CONF
Um.
Okay, so let me finish by saying a bit more
NOTE CONF
about this existential assumption.
So we've told you a lot about Aristotelian logic.
NOTE CONF
I knew almost nothing about Aristotelian logic before I started
teaching this course.
NOTE CONF
It's been an educational experience.
I have even gone back and read some Aristotle, which
NOTE CONF
is an even more educational experience, and for good measure.
I even tried to compare the Greek original with the
NOTE CONF
English translation, in case this weird thing that was happening
was something I didn't understand.
NOTE CONF
I don't actually know ancient Greek, so that was a
pointless activity, but quite fun because you live in a
NOTE CONF
world in which the manuscripts are online and you can
look at transcripts of Aristotle's works, whereas in my day
NOTE CONF
I would have had to go to the university library
and navigate the twisty maze of passages.
NOTE CONF
Um, so as I said, he didn't believe in talking
about non-existent things.
NOTE CONF
When you say when you make a universal statement, you
are also asserting a particular statement.
NOTE CONF
If you make this assumption, then there are more syllogisms
that become valid.
NOTE CONF
So this is the one we've seen before.
No reptiles have fur.
NOTE CONF
All snakes are reptiles.
Some snakes have no fur.
NOTE CONF
So that sounds like a reasonable piece of reasoning to
most people because it says, okay, reptiles don't have fur.
NOTE CONF
Snakes are reptiles.
Therefore, there are some snakes that don't have fur, and
NOTE CONF
in fact, all snakes don't have fur.
From our modern point of view, it is not sound
NOTE CONF
because this is a universal statement.
It says no reptiles have fur.
NOTE CONF
This is a universal statement.
All snakes are reptiles.
NOTE CONF
And for us, this does not commit to the existence
of snakes.
NOTE CONF
So we cannot say there is a snake.
But Aristotle thought that was a silly way to think.
NOTE CONF
So for him this was a valid syllogism.
Suppose that we want to Analyse the way that Aristotle
NOTE CONF
thought about syllogisms.
What can we do to extend our modern system with
NOTE CONF
something that lets us analyse Aristotelian syllogisms for validity?
So for us, this is wrong.
NOTE CONF
We can construct a universe where it fails.
And the exercises?
NOTE CONF
You should do that.
It's very simple.
NOTE CONF
But if we want to prove that it's valid in
Aristotle's world, well, we can add a kind of very
NOTE CONF
special syllogism.
It's not.
NOTE CONF
It's not a syllogism.
It's a rule.
NOTE CONF
So this is a rule that says from nothing at
all, we can infer the fact that A does not
NOTE CONF
entail not a.
That's a weird thing, right?
NOTE CONF
A does not entail not a.
What's that doing.
NOTE CONF
Let me just go.
Anybody at the back?
NOTE CONF
Too many people at the front.
Okay, somebody at the front.
NOTE CONF
Meenie.
Miney.
NOTE CONF
Moe.
Sorry.
NOTE CONF
Somebody.
I haven't learned all your names yet.
NOTE CONF
Or even any of your names.
I work on it, so.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
So if a does not entail.
NOTE CONF
Not a.
So suppose A entails not a.
NOTE CONF
That's weird.
Right.
NOTE CONF
How can a entail not a a can entail not
a only if there aren't any A's.
NOTE CONF
And that's where the weirdness of modern logic comes in.
So A entails not a means there aren't any.
NOTE CONF
A's, and therefore A does not entail not a means
that there is an A, because here is an example
NOTE CONF
of an A that does not entail not A.
It's inside and it's not outside.
NOTE CONF
I mean, it can't be inside an outside, but nonetheless
it exists.
NOTE CONF
So it's a slightly weird quirk of modern logic that
you can write a statement like this to say that
NOTE CONF
there must be at least one a and if we
do that, we can then add that as a premise
NOTE CONF
to syllogisms and derive some of the Aristotelian syllogisms.
And there is an example of this in the tutorial
NOTE CONF
exercise.
So you will get to do it.
NOTE CONF
Uh, let me finish by observing that this is a
modern, An simplified, cleaned up presentation of what was actually
NOTE CONF
going on.
Because if you really analyse Aristotle's works carefully.
NOTE CONF
Actually they're contradictory.
So his system is not a sound system according to
NOTE CONF
the likes of modern logic.
There is a deal of work by historical philosophers or
NOTE CONF
philosophical historians trying to work out what was going on.
I've tried to read some of it, and I reckon
NOTE CONF
that Aristotle was just confused.
He just never got it properly sorted out.
NOTE CONF
And if any of you have a burning urge to
go and read about it, this is the article that
NOTE CONF
I found most helpful.
Okay, so that brings us to the end of Aristotelian
NOTE CONF
logic.
I think we will move more into the modern world
NOTE CONF
next week.